SSH Keys, But for the Internet: Understanding Identity on Solana

Tags: 100daysofsolana solana web3 blockchain beginners

If you’ve spent years building in Web2, the idea of “identity on a blockchain” can sound strange at first. Where are the usernames? The login forms? The OAuth providers?
On Solana, identity works very differently — but there’s a good chance you already understand the core idea without realizing it.
Think about SSH keys
When you SSH into a server, you don’t type “who you are” every time. Instead, you prove ownership of a private key. The server trusts the corresponding public key, and that cryptographic relationship becomes your identity.
Solana works almost exactly the same way.
Your keypair is your identity
In Solana, identity starts with a keypair:
A private key that only you control
A public key that everyone can see
When you create a wallet, you are really generating a cryptographic identity.
Your public key becomes your address on the network. It looks something like this:
14grJpemFaf88c8tiVb77W7TYg2W3ir6pfkKz3YjhhZ5
That’s not a username stored in a database. It’s a 32-byte Ed25519 public key encoded in Base58.

Base58 exists for practical reasons:

It removes visually confusing characters like 0, O, I, and l
It avoids punctuation that breaks copying and URLs
It makes addresses safer for humans to handle

Under the hood, though, it’s still just a public key.

The network replaces the company

In Web2, identity is usually managed by a company.

Your Twitter account exists because Twitter’s database says it exists.

Your access depends on:

Email/password records
Session tokens
OAuth providers
Admin systems

Ultimately, the platform decides whether your account is valid.

Solana removes that middle layer.

There is no central database saying “Alice owns this account.” Instead, ownership is proven cryptographically.

If you can produce a valid signature using the private key, the network accepts that you are the owner.

That’s it.

No support ticket.
No password reset.
No admin override.

This is one of the biggest mindset shifts for Web2 developers: identity is not granted by an application. Identity is derived from cryptographic control.

Accounts on Solana are more like containers

Another important difference is that Solana’s accounts are not “user profiles.”

On Solana, everything lives inside accounts:

Wallet balances
Program state
Smart contracts
NFTs
Governance records

Accounts are the fundamental storage units of the network.

Your keypair controls some of those accounts by signing transactions.

If you’re coming from backend development, think of it this way:

In Web2:

Your app owns the database
Users authenticate against your system
Your backend decides permissions

In Solana:

The blockchain is the shared database
Users authenticate with signatures
Programs verify permissions cryptographically

Instead of checking:

if (session.user.id === post.ownerId)

A Solana program checks whether the transaction was signed by the expected public key.

The trust model moves from application logic to cryptographic proof.

Identity becomes portable

This is where things get interesting.

In Web2, your identity is fragmented:
GitHub knows one version of you
Discord knows another
Stripe knows another
None of them automatically trust each other

On Solana, the same identity works everywhere on the network.

One wallet can:

Hold tokens
Vote in governance systems
Trade NFTs
Interact with DeFi protocols
Build on-chain reputation
Sign into apps

And no application has to ask another application for permission.

That portability is possible because the identity layer is shared infrastructure.

Signing replaces logging in

A useful mental model is this:

Web2 apps ask:

“Do you know the password?”

Solana asks:

“Can you prove ownership of this key?”

That proof happens through digital signatures.

When your wallet signs a transaction:

The transaction data is hashed
Your private key signs the hash
The network verifies it using your public key

The private key never leaves your wallet, but the network can still verify ownership mathematically.

This is why wallets matter so much in crypto. They are not just payment apps — they are identity providers.

The tradeoff: freedom and responsibility

This model gives users something rare on the internet: true ownership.

But it also removes safety nets.

If a company controls identity, they can restore access.
If you control identity, losing the private key usually means losing access permanently.

That tradeoff is intentional.

Solana’s identity model prioritizes self-custody over recoverability.

For Web2 developers, this can feel uncomfortable at first because we are used to centralized account recovery systems. But it also unlocks something powerful: users no longer need permission from a platform to exist online.

Their identity belongs to them.

And on Solana, that identity is simply a keypair.